fix: Deprecate `setRequestLocale` and add blog post on `next/root-params` (#1632)
amannn/next-intl: docs/src/pages/blog/nextjs-root-params.mdx

---
title: 'New in Next.js 15.X: rootParams'
---

import StayUpdated from '@/components/StayUpdated.mdx';

# New in Next.js 15.X: `rootParams`

<small>Dec XX, 2024 · by Jan Amann</small>

(this post is still a draft)

> Next.js v15.X was just released and with it comes a new feature: [`rootParams`](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/pull/72837).

Author: ```suggestion
Next.js v15.X was just released and comes with a new feature: [`rootParams`](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/pull/72837).
```

async function Component() {
  // The ability to read params deeply in
  // Server Components ... finally!
  const {locale} = await rootParams();
}
```

This addition is a game-changer for `next-intl`.

While the library previously relied on workarounds to provide a locale to Server Components, this API now provides native support in Next.js for this use case, allowing the library to integrate much tighter with Next.js.

Practically, for users of `next-intl` this means:

1. Being able to support static rendering of apps with i18n routing without `setRequestLocale`
2. Improved integration with Next.js cache mechanisms
3. Preparation for upcoming rendering modes in Next.js like [Partial Prerendering](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/next-config-js/ppr) and [`dynamicIO`](https://nextjs.org/docs/canary/app/api-reference/config/next-config-js/dynamicIO) (although there seems to be more work necessary here on the Next.js side)

But first, let's have a look at how this API works in practice.

## Root layouts

Previously, Next.js required a [root layout](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/layout#root-layouts) to be present at `app/layout.tsx`.

> Now, you can move these to a nested folder that can be a dynamic segment, e.g.:

Author: ```suggestion
Now, you can move a root layout to a nested folder that can be a dynamic segment, e.g.:
```

```
src
└── app
    └── [locale]
        ├── layout.tsx (root layout)
        └── page.tsx
```

> A root layout is a layout that has no other layouts located above it.

Author: ```suggestion
In this extended definition, a root layout now is any layout that has no other layouts located above it.
```

In contrast, layouts that do have other layout ancestors are regular layouts:

```
src
└── app
    └── [locale]

>         ├── layout.tsx

Author: ```suggestion
        ├── layout.tsx (root layout)
```

        ├── (...)
        └── news
            ├── layout.tsx (regular layout)
            └── page.tsx
```

> With the addition of `rootParams`, you can now read the param values of a root layout in all Server Components that render within it:

Author: ```suggestion
With the addition of `rootParams`, you can now read param values of a root layout in all Server Components that render within it:
```

```tsx filename=src/components/LocaleSwitcher.tsx
import {unstable_rootParams as rootParams} from 'next/server';

export async function LocaleSwitcher() {
  // Read the value of `[locale]`
  const {locale} = await rootParams();

  // ...
}
```

## Multiple root layouts

Here's where it gets interesting: With [route groups](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/routing/route-groups), you can provide another layout for pages that are not located in the `[locale]` segment:

```
src
└── app
    ├── [locale]
    │   ├── layout.tsx
    │   └── page.tsx
    └── (unlocalized)
        ├── layout.tsx
        └── page.tsx
```

The layout at `[locale]/layout.tsx` as well as the layout at `(unlocalized)/layout.tsx` both have no other layouts located above them, therefore both qualify as root layouts. Due to this, in this case the returned value of `rootParams` will depend on where the component that calls the function is being rendered from.

If you call `rootParams` in shared code that is used by both root layouts, this allows for a pattern like this:

```tsx filename="src/utils/getLocale.tsx"
import {unstable_rootParams as rootParams} from 'next/server';

> export async function getLocale() {

Author: ```suggestion
export default async function getLocale() {
```

  // Try to read the locale in case we're in `[locale]/layout.tsx`
  let {locale} = await rootParams();

  // If we're in `(unlocalized)/layout.tsx`, let's use a fallback
  if (!locale) {
    locale = 'en';
  }

  return locale;
}
```

With this, you can use the `getLocale` function across your codebase to read the current locale without having to worry about where it's being called from.

> In an internationalized app, this can for example be useful to implement a country selection page at the root where you have to rely on a default locale.

Author: ```suggestion
In an internationalized app, this can for example be useful to implement a country selection page at the root where you have to rely on a default locale. Once the user is within the `[locale]` segment, this param value can be used instead for localizing page content.
```

## Static rendering

In case we know all possible values for the `[locale]` segment ahead of time, we can provide them to Next.js using the [`generateStaticParams`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/functions/generate-static-params) function to enable static rendering:

```tsx filename="src/app/[locale]/layout.tsx"
const locales = ['en', 'de'];

// Pre-render all available locales at build time
export async function generateStaticParams() {
  return locales.map((locale) => ({locale}));
}

// ...
```

> In combination with [`dynamicParams`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route-segment-config#dynamicparams), we can furthermore instruct Next.js to disallow values that are encountered at runtime and do not match the values we provided to `generateStaticParams`:

Author: ```suggestion
In combination with [`dynamicParams`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route-segment-config#dynamicparams), we can furthermore instruct Next.js to disallow values that are encountered at runtime and do not match the values we've provided to `generateStaticParams`:
```

So let's use `rootParams` here:

```tsx filename="src/i18n/request.ts"
import {unstable_rootParams as rootParams} from 'next/server';
import {getRequestConfig} from 'next-intl/server';
import {hasLocale} from 'next-intl';
import {routing} from './routing';

export default getRequestConfig(async () => {
  const params = await rootParams();
  const locale = hasLocale(routing.locales, params.locale)
    ? params.locale
    : routing.defaultLocale;

  return {
    locale,
    messages: (await import(`../../messages/${locale}.json`)).default
  };
});
```

`hasLocale` is a new addition scheduled for [`next-intl@4.0`](/blog/next-intl-4-0), but practically simply checks if the provided `locales` array contains a given `locale`. If it doesn't, typically because we're not in the `[locale]` segment, a default locale is used instead.

That's it—a single change to `i18n/request.ts` is all you need to do to start using `rootParams`!

> ## So much cleaner

Author: ```suggestion
## Time for spring cleaning
```

With this change, you can now simplify your codebase in various ways:

### Removing a pass-through root layout

For certain patterns like global 404 pages, you might have used a pass-through root layout so far:

```tsx filename="src/app/layout.tsx"
type Props = {
  children: React.ReactNode;
};

export default function RootLayout({children}: Props) {
  return children;
}
```

This needs to be removed now as otherwise this will qualify as a root layout instead of the one defined at `src/app/[locale]/layout.tsx`.

### Avoid reading the `[locale]` segment

Since `next-intl` provides the current locale via [`useLocale` and `getLocale`](/docs/usage/configuration#locale), you can seamlessly read the locale from these APIs instead of `params` now:

```diff filename="src/app/[locale]/layout.tsx"
+ import {getLocale} from 'next-intl/server';

type Props = {
  children: React.ReactNode;
-  params: {locale: string};
};

export default async function RootLayout({
  children,
-  params
}: Props) {
-  const {locale} = await params;
+  const locale = await getLocale();

  return (
    <html lang={locale}>
      <body>{children}</body>
    </html>
  );
}
```

> Behind the scenes, if you call `useLocale` or `getLocale` in a Server Component, your `i18n/request.ts` config will be consulted, potentially using a fallback that you've defined.

Author: ```suggestion
Behind the scenes, if you call `useLocale` or `getLocale` in a Server Component, your `i18n/request.ts` config will be consulted, potentially using a fallback that you have defined.
```

```tsx filename="src/app/[locale]/layout.tsx"
// Return a 404 for any unknown locales
export const dynamicParams = false;
```

If you don't use `generateStaticParams`, you can still disallow unknown locales by manually calling `notFound()` based on `params` in your root layout:

```tsx filename="src/app/[locale]/layout.tsx"
import {hasLocale} from 'next-intl';
import {notFound} from 'next/navigation';
import {routing} from '@/i18n/routing';

type Props = {
  children: React.ReactNode;
  params: Promise<{locale: string}>;
};

export default async function RootLayout({children, params}: Props) {
  const {locale} = await params;
  if (!hasLocale(routing.locales, locale)) {
    return notFound();
  }

  // ...
}
```

## Try `rootParams` today!

While this article mentions an upcoming `hasLocale` API from `next-intl@4.0` that simplifies working with `rootParams`, you can already try out the API today even in the `3.0` range.

The one rare case where a change from `next-intl@4.0` is required, is if you need to [manually pass a locale](#locale-override) to async APIs like `getTranslations` in case your UI renders multiple locales in parallel.

> In case you're trying out `rootParams` with `next-intl`, let me know how it goes by joining the discussion here: [Experiences with `rootParams`](https://github.com/amannn/next-intl/discussions/1627). I'm curious to hear how it simplifies your codebase!

Author: ```suggestion
If you're giving `rootParams` a go with `next-intl`, let me know how it works for you by joining the discussion here: [Experiences with `rootParams`](https://github.com/amannn/next-intl/discussions/1627). I'm curious to hear how it simplifies your codebase!
```
